welcome to my sub stack podcast
and there's an article associated with
this i just thought i would mention that
to anyone who is listening
via the usual top cast feed especially
for this one because if i start to make
any claims that seem to sound outrageous
there will be links in the original
article which can be found on substack
which can be found via the link wherever
you've downloaded this particular
episode there are lots of
factual claims i'm making in this and
i'm not just pulling them out of the
ether they come from somewhere so i'm
referring to something but rather than
saying this is coming from a nature
article or this is coming from this
website or that website i'm not going to
say that at all during this particular
audio version of the podcast or of the
article instead just go to the article
and you will see there that there are
lots and lots of links where i'm
referring to
bits of research or particular pieces of
statistical data that happen to be out
there with that preface out of the way
let me begin the next episode of my
readings from and reflections upon
chiara malettos the science of canon
can't which is chapter six work and heat
is well on the way hopefully here
tomorrow or the next day
work and heat are the two primary forms
of fundamental energy so it has been on
my mind of late hence this particular
substance article today which i'm
calling energy i'm going to leave
remarks about the physics of
thermodynamics given kiara's work in
constructor theory
to the next episode of topcast itself
therefore but for today i wanted to try
to bridge the gap between those timeless
concerns about energy the fundamentals
of work and heat and the more timely
contemporary and pressing concerns that
occupy us at this point in history how
energy is used right now to power
civilization and therefore
problem solving and knowledge production
we want the lights to be on we want the
indoors of our homes and offices to be
not too warm not too cool so we need
adequate technology for air conditioning
and we want our computers and factories
to help realize our creative aspirations
but all of this takes energy because so
much requires electricity and that
electricity production comes with side
effects as we like to say here in the
tradition of papa the solution of one
set of problems heating or cooling
energy for cooking or computing leads to
a whole other set of problems waste and
pollution and those new problems are
actually better than the original
problems after all people were starving
or freezing to death or being unable to
use computers at all until those
problems were solved and now we've got
some waste and pollution to deal with
this waste and pollution is a necessary
byproduct because of the physical laws
governing these processes there simply
must be waste nothing is perfectly
efficient and some of that pollution in
our case happens to be in the form of a
particular chemical carbon dioxide and
that has been explained that when it's
in the atmosphere it captures infrared
radiation as it leaves the surface of
the planet and redirects it back towards
the surface of our planet of the earth
and that process is known as the
greenhouse effect and this greenhouse
effect gradually warms the planet
raising its overall temperature
especially when it's the enhanced
greenhouse effect with or without people
this is known to happen because well
volcanoes produce carbon dioxide but
with people burning fossil fuels this
leads to as i say the enhanced
greenhouse effect which has been
explained to cause various runaway
processes like the melting of ice caps
and even the melting of solid methane
deposits on ocean floors which
themselves could accelerate the entire
process of heating even more for more on
that look up the so-called clathrate gun
hypothesis so given these changes that
are happening and are predicted to
continue to happen without our
intervention people have proposed
policies to transition away from fossil
fuels the very things that when you burn
them cause the increase in carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere which causes
the enhanced greenhouse effect and this
has all begun to happen this transition
away from fossil fuels in some places
much faster than others but in lockstep
with this transition to non-fossil fuel
burning energy sources or renewables as
they're called there exists an argument
that says the movement to renewable
energy is happening too fast
the argument is that reducing to the
point of eliminating our society's
dependence on fossil fuels is happening
at such a rate the amount of so-called
base load energy available in the
electricity networks around the world
will soon become if it is not already
too limited to actually keep the lights
on now if that sounds like science
fiction it isn't because it's been
happening in australia just recently now
i've linked to an article that speaks
about the transition from wood to coal
and then from coal to oil and it
explains how that took many decades in
each case and i might add it didn't
require top-down coercion in almost any
case people simply move they chose to go
from wood to coal because it was clearly
a better cheaper and healthier
alternative better in almost every
conceivable way
no one needed much persuading it was
better by their own lights this is not
so today people do need persuading there
needs to be huge marketing or education
campaigns and it seems that only
conservative politicians and perhaps
spokespeople or lobbyists for energy
companies or complete outliers like
bjorn lomberg who's an environmentalist
skeptical of the present solutions for
global warming or alex epstein a
philosopher who was a proponent of
fossil fuels it's only these kinds of
people who argue that this transition is
happening too fast some seem to be
arguing it need not happen at all so
there are the opponents of that whole
seemingly pessimistic view that the
transition is happening too fast and the
opponents are proponents of renewables
like wind and solar and green storage
options like batteries and perhaps
pumped storage which is the building of
dams which can be used as sources of
hydroelectricity during times of need
these are all coming online already so
it's happening a pace technology
invariably improves and if we aim for a
target of reducing carbon emissions and
decommissioning coal-fired power
stations and all other fossil fuel usage
for the production of electricity by the
time this is all accomplished the
technology will be there to power a
completely green energy grid or as near
completely as you could hope for
we can aim for the decommissioning of
all coal-fired power stations by 2030
because by then we will have the
technology available to take up the
short for by these arguments australia
for example should be able to keep 95 of
the coal it has available to it in the
ground and never used
it is the only hope of stopping the
warming of the planet beyond the crucial
limit of 1.5 degrees celsius we are
sometimes told there's been modeling
done by a group who published in the
journal nature which said that although
australia needs to move to renewables
entirely by 2030 other countries should
aim for 2050 by which time 90 percent of
the coal in the ground in the world will
remain forever untouched after this
because it will never need to be now
that argument seems optimistic to some
one might even say it is blindly
optimistic because although it says the
problem of how to replace carbon dioxide
producing atmosphere heat retaining
climate energy changing sources is
soluble it does not say well here is the
solution now but rather the solution is
coming have
faith in progress and technology all we
need is a policy change and then solar
panels put on rooftops everywhere will
do the job that coal presently does when
it comes to electricity generation and
just adds some batteries into the grid
for when the sun is not shining what
this argument may ignore is a couple of
things
the first is that it assumes no other
problems requiring an increase in
electricity production suddenly will
arise over the next few years as we do
decommission the base load fossil fuel
power stations it assumes a rather
constant amount of use and that use can
be met by gradual replacement of coal
with say wind solar and batteries so we
must assume that for whatever reason the
resources required to manufacture those
things
remain unaffected by global conflicts
extended bad weather like weeks of
cloudy cold and windless weather in
winter where the sun is already low on
the horizon in many places or supply
chain issues or the discovery of some
hitherto unknown problems that a yet to
be environmental movement will decide
and campaign on as just being as
damaging as coal after all this is quite
possible already some noises are being
made about the chemicals in batteries
and in solar panels so there is that the
solution requires minimal disruption
which requires a certain degree of
prophecy presuming we can know what the
future holds this solution this
transition to renewables almost entirely
also assumes that the problems that are
said to be
with the burning of coal really do
require a reasonably rapid transition to
so-called renewable energy sources and
that this transition will lead to better
preferable problems than the problems
created by the burning of fossil fuels
so for example the cost of renewables
will easily be met by not only the
people of poorer nations but also the
least wealthy people in the most wealthy
nations and that all of this can be done
at our level of decision making that is
perhaps supranational and beyond the
capacity of local governance to affect
the curious thing about all this is that
historically every other transition that
has happened whether in energy from wood
to coal coal to oil as already mentioned
or technologies from horse and buggy to
automobile or perhaps today to electric
car or from candle to incandescent light
bulb to leds as we have today or from
transistor radios to black and white
televisions to color cathode ray tubes
to plasma screens to 1080 flat screen
lcds to 4k backlit led lcds or from
transnational ocean liner to airbus 380
transcontinental flight and so on and on
and on it goes for all those
individuals by their own lights chose
the preferred option because it was
better for them indeed objectively
better because it was cheaper and their
standard of living went up they could
see with their own eyes in real time
that their own bank accounts were
healthier and the smiles on the faces of
their children that each of those things
was an objective improvement and no
government had to mandate a policy from
black and white television screens to 4k
lcd flat screens but with the transition
from coal to solar
it's not like this there was a time i
remember it was only less than a decade
ago when on my own electricity bill it
was actually made explicit there was a
box one could tick to buy the renewable
option and for a premium for paying more
you could choose to invest in which is
to say purchase the electricity coming
from renewable sources or you could buy
the cheaper coal option then that option
disappeared but it's clearly possible
for companies to do this at the retail
level to bundle up all those who tick
the box for solar and
renewables and then purchase electricity
from the wholesaler or provider based on
what the consumer wants why is that not
an option now as time goes on if solar
really is cheaper because more and more
solar panels are manufactured then the
price would presumably come down and
more and more people would presumably
choose to sign up for it
of course if that's not happening but
some authority demands it does easy they
just take away the option move entirely
to renewables anyway regardless of what
people want regardless of what those
people think about costs and efficacy
regardless of whether they understand
that the transition is inevitable and is
best for everyone on the planet
technology improves and will continue to
improve we can literally cover vast
areas of let's say the centre of
australia where the skies are clear
with solar panels and wind farms yes
there will be a cost of transmission yes
there'll be some difficulty with
maintenance yes environmentalists of a
different kind may be concerned about
the vast areas being covered and
transformed by these technologies and
this may slow things down as it always
does but
problems are soluble after all and there
is something else to be said for this
optimistic idea that replacing coal oil
and gas and transitioning to renewables
by a particular date even if it is not
yet known how
renewable technology can exactly fill in
the gaps today all on the assumption
that it will be known by then by the
time the last coal-fired power station
shuts down we will then have enough
renewable energy in the grid we will
know how to make up the shortfall
because there will be no shortfall then
there will be wind and solar and
batteries enough even in the winter
months when people need to heat their
homes but the sun is not shining much
and the wind is not blowing much now and
again and perhaps there has been little
rain for a while so the pump storage
dams are running low never mind
by then we will know we will have
solutions be optimistic
that other thing to be said for all this
hope and optimism is
it works precisely in the other
direction
if the argument is we do not have the
technology right now today to transition
to an entirely or almost entirely
renewable electricity grid in a way we
know will be reliable even in winter
months when the electricity use is at
its highest but energy production from
renewables is at its lowest but we know
in theory how it could be done or at
least we know that it could be done we
know about scaling solar and wind and
batteries those technologies really do
exist today and it is merely a
manufacturing problem a problem of
scaling of taking what some nations
apparently already do on a large scale
and in the limit having all nations do
this to the same extent so that 90
percent or 95 or 100
of their energy comes from solar and
wind this argument that it can be done
it is just a matter of doing it applies
equally to removing carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere and generating all
electricity using fusion power as well
indeed it could very well apply to the
argument that using the existing fossil
fuel technology to power the technology
that sequesters carbon dioxide directly
out of the atmosphere it is clear in
some places now that the so-called
transition to a green economy is not
pain-free some think this pain is just a
part of the process and it's a virtue if
it hurts it must be good people may see
their energy bills increase but that's
just part of the process
people may see blackouts or be told
there is a risk of blackouts that's a
part of the process
there may be social division where to be
vocally pro-green is virtuous but to
question it is to be reckless and
uncaring
part of the process
there may be fear where children are in
tears concerned about a planet that is
endangered where their own lives are
endangered but that's part of the
process of persuasion why do people need
to be persuaded of an emergency that we
are told is already upon us and has been
here for decades
it may be that carbon sequestration is
possible and not merely possible but we
already know exactly how to do it but
saying it is too slow
is also part of the process being
optimistic about renewables is the one
form of optimism that is permitted on
every other technology like the promise
of fusion power or the promise of carbon
sequestration we must be pessimistic
that is part of the process of
transitioning to an entirely green
economy it's almost as if there are
competing financial interests at play
motivating reasoning in one direction
more than another if the argument is
that technology will save the day
tomorrow when it comes to climate change
and this is why beginning the transition
now by decommissioning coal-fired power
stations today
then why does that same argument not
apply
with respect to any other solution to
climate change that technology will save
the day tomorrow if we just keep using
coal-fired power stations and any other
cheap energy available given that
technology already exists that can
remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and or fusion power is known
to be possible which will make every
debate over electricity generation
hitherto that has been had for decades
completely redundant once it has been
scaled to the level of every nation
relying on fusion reactors for their
base load generation we know that
generating heat from fusion reactions is
possible
the sun does it hydrogen bonds do it in
terms of controlling that reaction so
that the heat production can be
regulated in order to for example heat
water to create steam which spins
turbines connected to generators it has
been said it has been done in the lab
efficiently in a kind of
proof-of-concept kind of way
it seems that if anything in this space
is inevitable then this kind of fusion
power is
small cheap safe fusion power reactors
which produce no waste basically except
for maybe helium gas which floats
harmlessly off into the atmosphere it
might happen within 10 years or 20 or 50
or maybe 100 but even without fusion
we've got fission we already have a
means of producing electricity at scale
with next to zero carbon dioxide
emissions and which in theory could also
be connected to carbon dioxide
sequestering technology
and why no one takes the notion of
planting trees or even the notion that
as concentration of carbon dioxide rises
in the atmosphere by whatever means the
amount of plants both aquatic and on the
land rises in response to it is not at
all clear that as carbon dioxide
concentration increases in the
atmosphere then in response plants
especially marine plants especially the
phytoplankton significantly increase
their growth that this happens across
the board when it comes to plants
increase the carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere the amount of plant life on
earth increases this whole process is
like a natural example of lush italia's
principle for those who don't know the
chemistry lash italia's principle is the
idea of chemical equilibrium where if
you have a system that normally exists
in some kind of equilibrium then if the
conditions change such as the
concentration of a reactant then the
entire system itself reacts to
counteract that change so here the idea
is simple increase the carbon dioxide in
the system and in response
photosynthesis which consumes carbon
dioxide is pushed more strongly in favor
of the products namely the production of
oxygen and glucose or in other words
plant growth in order to counteract the
change that is occurring now whether in
to what extent the plant growth
increases enough or at a rate sufficient
to counteract all the carbon dioxide
being added to the atmosphere in
response to the burning of fossil fuels
that's an open question but it is the
case plant growth has increased over the
decades for those who want radical
change the ways in which electricity is
generated this the earth is becoming
green a fact
is a very uncomfortable one which is
rarely mentioned or mentioned only to be
dismissed or as dismissed as a talking
point of the climate change denialist
but aside from plants it is also known
that there exists ways of removing
carbon dioxide as i've mentioned from
the atmosphere directly this so-called
direct air capture carbon sequestration
technology exists today but the problem
is it's expensive and why because
electricity is expensive and the
relevant technology itself needs to be
powered hooked up to the grid
but in a world powered by for example
fusion power we could literally have
entire fusion reactors devoted to
nothing but capturing carbon dioxide
directly from the atmosphere and placing
it back into the ground into rocks which
is kind of where it came from in the
first place as coal and this possibility
raises the interesting question in such
a world where electricity is so cheap
because the only cost is the manufacture
and maintenance of the power station
itself the raw material is literally
hydrogen taken from let's say the
electrolysis of water how much carbon
dioxide would or should we remove from
the atmosphere
would we lower it to 1800 levels if and
when we could pre-industrial revolution
but why then we are after all now in the
2020s and by the time we have fusion
power maybe it'll be say 20 70. and with
or without people the climate changes
naturally so should we project what the
levels of carbon dioxide would have been
in 2017 absent the existence of humans
on the planet and then adjust things to
that level but why would that
necessarily be the ideal what does ideal
mean in a world without humans and what
if a volcano goes off spewing vast
quantities of carbon dioxide naturally
into the atmosphere does the fact it's
not a man-made climate change event mean
we suck that carbon dioxide out of the
atmosphere or not well if we did that
every time a volcano went off that would
upset the carbon cycle itself and rain
patterns around the world so would it be
better to intervene so that deserts
receive more rain or not should the
tropics receive
less rain in some places so that floods
are a reduced risk or is flooding a part
of the natural environment necessary for
providing adaptive advantages for some
organisms
what about forest fires do we use our
carbon sequestration technology to
neutralize the increased carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere from forest fires but
haven't we already admitted because
we've learned that increased carbon
dioxide is good for plants that we
should allow forest fires to continue is
it only the man-made ones that we should
worry about are not the ones caused by
lightning strikes if the argument in the
first place with respect to climate
change is that
we humans caused it namely it is
anthropogenic climate change and humans
therefore by their very nature are
unnatural what they do is damaging then
how can a situation where we do more of
that of intervening of controlling the
environment by removing the carbon
dioxide that is there and deciding how
much there should be in the atmosphere
possibly be a solution to that
to the fact that our interventions are
damaging but then simply doing nothing
is also not a solution because we've
already done so much we are told to the
environment to change it so should we
change it back
but back to what what is the pristine
state of things is it where water and
air is unfiltered
clearly not
but should we let carbon dioxide from
forest fires volcanoes and underwater
eruptions occur without our intervention
because they are natural or should we
just let all those things occur only in
the places where there are no people but
what about the purported suffering of
animal life there should we stop natural
disasters where we can or is our
intervention itself a priori a disaster
what about plants that benefit from the
occasional fire and the entire ecosystem
that in the long run benefits from big
changes in the global environment as has
happened over geological time here on
earth it is clear there are many many
more questions than answers here what is
unusual is that in a complex space of
possibilities there have been a few
purported solutions that powerful
businesses and political leaders have
become fixated upon hitherto only a
small number of corporations and nations
have found themselves fortunate enough
to be in possession in the right place
at the right time to have the natural
resources literally beneath their feet
to power the economy of the last few
decades fossil fuels are not distributed
evenly across the globe they are by
simple luck found only in some places on
this planet and not others in abundance
they are an absolute boon to those who
possess both the good fortune
namely those resources are near the
surface easy to get to
and knowledge both political scientific
and technological
and will the human will to scale these
things up use them and export them
energy is a profitable business but
imagine you found alternatives you found
you could manufacture solar and wind and
batteries and so on but your great
competitor are the old fossil fuels so
for now it's just not economically
feasible to scale all of those things up
to the level of coal oil gas and nuclear
powered electricity generation
what are you going to do as a business
person well one thing would be to
demonize the opposition as has always
happened in markets everywhere anytime
sometimes the demonization might be
warranted microsoft windows pcs are far
more prone to viruses get an apple mac
apple macs are far more expensive and
less customizable get a windows machine
and be really in control of your
operating system and apps do you like
games avoid the mac get a pc do you like
creating get a mac avoid the pc but here
the consumer makes the choice our
competitors close detergent can leave
your shirts dull and lifeless buy breeze
washing detergent for bright fragrant
clothes after every wash make the smart
decision but here with energy production
a complicated area with as many unknowns
as knowns the individual is told there
can no longer be a choice or if there is
it's a choice between the survival of
the planet and death and destruction
climate change is an emergency every
flood fire heat wave each drought and
supply chain issue and cold snap each
time crops fail or a species is reported
endangered that's all climate change so
you can have all of that the death the
destruction the decay and the disease or
you can choose life and renewables if
one did not know better it would not
seem to be science speaking to you here
but rather a marketing campaign of a
kind a choice is being offered of a
better detergent or rather better
electricity for keeping the lights on
and the heating running the healthier
choice the more moral and virtuous wise
and indeed scientific choice who could
possibly choose otherwise but an
ignoramus who has been blinded by
scientific illiteracy and a mustache
twirling nefarious concern for profits
above people never mind how much money
there might be in renewable technologies
never mind how truly renewable the
technology is given that all those solar
panels wind farms and especially
batteries need to be replaced and
manufactured over and again ignore the
fact your own mobile needs to be
replaced every couple of years once the
battery goes for good these things too
can be sold for much larger batteries
that will be relied upon almost solely
to power the grid on cold still winter's
nights at least we'll be off coal
here in australia over the last week the
news has been wall to wall about how the
eastern states of new south wales
victoria and queensland but especially
where i live in new south wales have
been at risk of blackouts in the major
cities now australia it should be known
as some of the largest coal gas and
uranium reserves on the planet
we contribute something like 1.16 per
percent of global carbon dioxide
emissions how can a nation so rich in
natural resources
specifically the natural resources used
for producing electricity be in a
position that countries with almost no
natural resources of the same kind one i
know about as south korea are in south
korea tends not to experience blackouts
or even the risk of blackouts but we
just have been told that we're at risk
of blackouts
in terms of coal
australia is third in the world with 14
percent
of all coal on the planet
while south korea it's ranked 46th in
terms of coal deposits it's got less
than 0.1 percent of all coal on the
planet and yet
electricity in south korea where most of
the resources for producing it are
imported
is far far cheaper astonishingly given
those statistics the sheer amount of
resources literally under our feet in
australia extracted as it is and then
exported the cost of electricity in
australia is around about
0.216
us dollars per kilowatt hour 21.6 cents
u.s cents per kilowatt hour that makes
us 26th most expensive on a list of 147
nations now more expensive than us
admittedly is the united kingdom they're
eight
at
0.265 us dollars per kilowatt hour but
that makes sense they're not sitting on
huge coal deposits although they have
some and they've shut down i think some
of their coal mines
germany is even higher even more
expensive fourth at 33 u.s cents
us dollars per kilowatt hour but the usa
well they're all the way down at 56th
only 0.159
us dollars per kilowatt hour south korea
who imports almost all of its energy
from outside are 90th their electricity
is only
0.097 us dollars an hour
china cheaper still 101st on that list
0.08 us dollars per kilowatt hour and
they're importing much of their coal
that they burn to generate their
electricity from australia so even with
all the transport costs they have to get
the stuff all the way from australia to
china they still pay far less than we do
in australia and when i last checked and
i looked it up beijing was not at a huge
risk of continual blackouts not that we
are either but the fact that it's even
on the cards is bizarre
it is policy and not resources that
makes the difference knowledge here
choosing what to do makes the difference
here and the policy that we have
policies where blackouts become a risk
where resources are in complete
abundance that would solve the problem
is bad policy by the measure it's
creating worse problems than it's
solving if the best we can do is
mitigate 1.16 of global emissions even
if we stopped burning all of our coal
here and yet remain in an electricity
production situation as precarious as
some barely industrialized nations
something has gone terribly wrong
and it is not a lack of investment in
renewables it is a shift far too quickly
from reliable cheap and efficient coal
which is beneath our feet and which
could make us more wealthy to
technologies that are unreliable most
especially in winter and yet people
continue to vote for those policies
because they're being told again and
again it is the scientific
virtuous and good thing to do
to save the planet